hindi:english
दुःख में सब सुमिरन करें,:In sorrow everyone remembers God,
दुःख:sorrow
सब:everyone
सुमिरन:remembers God
सुख में कोई न करे.:but in happiness no one does.
सुख:happiness
जो सुख में सुमिरन करे,:Those who remembers God even in happiness,
दुःख कहे को होय?:then why would there be sorrow?
कहे:why
तिनका कबहुँ ना निन्दिये,:Never criticize even a tiny thorn,
तिनका:tiny thorn
कबहुँ ना:never
निन्दिये:criticize
जो पाँवन तर होय,:that lies beneath your feet,
पाँवन:feet
कबहुँ उड़ी आँखिन पड़े,:For if it ever flies up and falls in your eye,
कबहुँ:For if it ever
उड़ी:flies up
तो पीर घनेरी होय.:then the pain will be intense.
पीर:pain
घनेरी:intense
माला:rosary
फेरत:by rotating
जुग:ages
माला फेरत जुग भया,:A person may rotate a rosary for ages,
फिरा:change, rotate
मन:mind
फिरा न मन का फेर,:yet the inner disposition of their mind remains unchanged,
मनका:beads
डार:stop
कर का मनका डार दे,:Instead stop turning the beads,
मन का मनका फेर.:change, rotate or transform the pearls of your thoughts within.
गुरु:teacher
गोविन्द: the divine
दोऊ:both
खड़े:stand
गुरु गोविन्द दोऊ खड़े,:When both the teacher and the Divine stand before you,
काके:whom
लागू पाय: bow to or touch feet
काके लागू पाय?:whom should you bow to?
बलिहारी:bow to or salutations
बलिहारी गुरु आपने,:I bow to you teacher,
बताय:reveal
गोविन्द दियो बताय.:who revealed the path to the divine.
बलिहारी:bow to or salutions
बलिहारी गुरु आपनो,:Salutations to you teacher,
घड़ी-घड़ी:moment after moment
सौ सौ बार:tirelessly
घड़ी-घड़ी सौ सौ बार,:who tirelessly, moment after moment,
मानुष:humans
देवत:divine
मानुष से देवत किया,:From humans turned us to divine,
करत:actions
बार:burden
करत न लागी बार.:our actions do not burden the teacher.
कबिरा:Kabir says
मनहि:mind and soul
कबिरा माला मनहि की,:Kabir says to turn the rosary of mind and soul,
संसारी:worldly possessions
और संसारी भीख,:and worldly possessions are like begging,
हरि:Divine
माला फेरे हरि मिले,:By turning the beads you will find the Divine residing within,
गले रहट के देख.:wear it around your neck and see.
दुख में सुमरिन सब करे,:During times of sorrow, everyone remembers the Divine,
कोय:anyone
सुख में करे न कोय,:but in joy hardly anyone does,
जो सुख में सुमरिन करे,:the one who remembers the Divine even during happy times,
काहे:why
दुख काहे को होय?:why will we ever experience sorrow?
साईं:lord
साईं इतना दीजिये,:O Lord grant me only this much,
जा मे:through or in which
कुटुम:family
समाय:sustain
जा मे कुटुम समाय,:through which it's enough to sustain my family,
भूखा:hungry
मैं भी भूखा न रहूँ,:May I never go hungry,
साधु:saint
जाय:go
साधु ना भूखा जाय.:and may the saints never go hungry either.
नाम:name
लूट:plunder
राम नाम की लूट है लूट सके तो लूट,:If you can plunder the wealth of chanting Lord Rama’s name,
अंत:end
अंत समय पछतायेगा,:at the end you’ll regret,
जब:when
प्राण:life
जब प्राण जायेंगे छूट.:when your life departs away.
जाति:caste
पूछो:ask
जाति न पूछो साधु की,:Do not ask about the caste of a saint,
ज्ञान:wisdom or knowledge
पूछ लीजिए ज्ञान,:inquire about their wisdom instead,
मोल:value
तरवार:sword
मोल करो तरवार का,:value the sword's sharpness,
म्यान:sheath
पड़ा रहन दो म्यान.:leave aside the sheath.
जहाँ:where
दया:compassion
तहाँ:there
धर्म:righteousness or religion
जहाँ दया तहाँ धर्म है,:Where there is compassion there resides righteousness,
लोभ:greed
पाप:sin
जहाँ लोभ तहाँ पाप,:Where there is greed there dwells sin,
क्रोध:anger
काल:destruction
कल:tomorrow
जहाँ क्रोध तहाँ काल है,:Where there is anger there is destruction,
क्षमा:forgiveness
आप:you
जहाँ क्षमा तहाँ आप.:And where forgiveness exists there is you.
धीरे-धीरे: slow and patiently
धीरे-धीरे रे मन,:Be patient my mind,
धीरे सब कुछ होय,:Everything takes its own time to take place,
माली:gardener
सींचे:irrigate
सौ:hundred
घड़ा:jug
माली सींचे सौ घड़ा,:Even if the gardener irrigates by pouring a hundred jugs of water,
ॠतु:season
आए:come
फल:fruit
ॠतु आए फल होय.:the fruits grow only when the right season comes.
अन्ध:blind
कबीरा ते नर अन्ध हैं गुरु को कहते और,:Kabir says those who consider the teacher inferior to God are spiritually blind,
रूठे:angry or displeased
हरि रूठे गुरु ठौर है,:When God is displeased we still have the Guru’s support,
गुरु रूठे नहीं ठौर.:but once the Guru is displeased there is no refuge left.
पाँच पहर:five hours
धन्धे:worldly pursuits or work
तीन:three
पहर:hour
सोय:slept
मुक्ति:liberation
पाँच पहर धन्धे गया,:five hours a day is spent in worldly pursuits,
तीन पहर गया सोय,:three hours spent in sleep,
एक पहर भी नाम बिन,:Even if one hour goes by without chanting the Divine name,
मुक्ति कैसे होय?:how can liberation be attained?
क्या:what
सोया:asleep
करे:do
कबीरा सोया क्या करे?:Kabir asks what use is it to be asleep?
उठि:awaken
उठि न भजे भगवान,:If you do not awaken to worship the Divine,
जम:yama
घर:home
पड़ा:remain
जम जब घर ले जाएँगे,:when yama takes you to his home,
पड़ा रहेगा म्यान:only the sheath or body remains.
शीलवन्त:virtuous person
शीलवन्त सबसे बड़ा,:The virtuous person is the greatest treasure,
सब:whole
रतनन:jewels
खान:mine
सब रतनन की खान,:a whole mine of jewels,
लोक:realms
सम्पदा:wealth
तीन लोक की सम्पदा,:he is the wealth of the three realms,
शील:Modesty
आन:pride or wealth
रही शील में आन.:True wealth or pride lies in his modesty.
माया:illusion
मरी:died or perished
मरा:died or perished
माया मरी न मन मरा,:Neither illusion has died nor has the mind perished,
मर-मर:die again and again
शरीर:body
मर-मर गए शरीर,:The body keeps taking birth and dies again,
आशा:Desires
तृष्णा:cravings
आशा तृष्णा न मरी,:Desires and cravings remain untouched,
कह गए दास कबीर.:Thus says Kabir Das.
माटी:clay
कुम्हार:potter
माटी कहे कुम्हार से,:clay says to the potter,
मोहे:me
रोंदे:constantly mold and knead
तू क्या रोंदे मोहे?:you think you can constant mold me?
दिन:day
एक दिन ऐसा आएगा,:One day a time will come,
तोहे:you
मैं रोंदूगी तोहे.:when I will knead and shape you.
रात:night
गंवाई:lost
सोय:sleep
रात गंवाई सोय कर,:The night is lost in sleep,
दिवस:day
गंवायो:lost
खाय:eat
दिवस गंवायो खाय,:The day is lost in eating,
हीरा:diamond
जनम:life
अमोल:precious and priceless
कौड़ी:coins or money
बदले:exchanged
हीरा जनम अमोल था कौड़ी बदले जाय.:Life like a precious diamond is being exchanged for mere coins.
नींद:sleep or unawareness
निशानी:sign
नींद निशानी मौत की,:Unawareness is a sign of death,
उठ:get up
जाग:awake
उठ कबीरा जाग,:wake up Kabira,
रसायन:drugs
और रसायन छांड़ि के,:and leave aside all other drugs and,
नाम:name
लाग:practise
नाम रसायन लाग.:practice the drug of chanting the divine name.
तोकूं:you
काँटा:thorn
बुवै:pricks
जो तोकूं काँटा बुवै,:What pricks you as a thorn,
फूल:flower
बोय:speak
ताहि बोय तू फूल,:speak of it as a flower,
तोकू:you
तोकू फूल के फूल है,:What pricks you is a flower,
बांकू:thorn
तिरशूल:trident
बांकू है तिरशूल.:what you speak of as a thorn is like a trident.
दुर्लभ:rare
मानुष:human
जनम:birth
दुर्लभ मानुष जनम है,:A rare human's birth is rare,
देह न बारम्बार,:the body is not repeated,
तरुवर ज्यों पत्ती झड़े,:Just as a leaf falls from a tree,
बहुरि न लागे दार.:it never reattaches to the branch.
आय हैं सो जाएँगे,:Those who come will eventually go,
राजा रंक फकीर,:whether they are kings or beggars,
एक सिंहासन चढ़ि चले,:One ascends the throne,
एक बँधे जात जंजीर.:while another remains bound in chains.
काल करे सो आज कर,:What you need to do tomorrow do today,
आज करे सो अब,:what you need to do today do now,
पल में परलय होएगी,:In a moment the apocalypse will arrive,
बहुरि करेगा कब?:when will you get another chance?
मांगन मरण समान है,:Begging is akin to death,
मति मांगो कोई भीख,:so do not beg for alms,
मांगन ते मरना भला,:It is better to die than to beg,
यही सतगुरु की सीख.:such is the teaching of the true teacher.
जहाँ आपा तहाँ आपदां,:Where there is ego there is adversity,
जहाँ संशय तहाँ रोग,:where there is doubt there is disease,
कह कबीर यह क्यों मिटे?:Why does Kabir say this?
चारों धीरज रोग.:Because all four are ailments of patience.
माया छाया एक सी,:worldly attachment and shadow are alike,
बिरला जाने कोय,:only a few recognize this,
भगता के पीछे लगे,:worldly attachment chases one who run away,
सम्मुख भागे सोय.:but when faced directly it flees itself.
आया था किस काम को?:Why did you come into this world?
तू सोया चादर तान,:You sleep wrapped in a blanket,
सूरत सम्हाल ऐ गाफिल,:Wake up O heedless one,
अपना आप पहचान.:recognize yourself.
क्या भरोसा देह का,:Why trust the body,
बिनस जात छिन मांह?:which is perishable and fleeting?
साँस-सांस सुमिरन करो,:Remember the Divine with every breath,
और यतन कुछ नांह.:for there is no other remedy.
गारी ही सो ऊपजे,:What you sow so shall you reap,
कलह कष्ट और भींच,:conflict and hardship are the seeds,
हारि चले सो साधु हैं,:One who accepts defeat is noble sage,
लागि चले सो नीच.:and one who persists in conflict is low.
दुर्बल को न सताइए,:Do not torment the weak,
जाकि मोटी हाय,:for they are like pearls,
बिना जीव की हाय से,:Without the breath of life,
लोहा भस्म हो जाय.:iron turns to ashes.
दान दिए धन ना घते,:Donating money doesn't make it less,
नदी ने घटे नीर,:for the river doesn’t lose water by giving,
अपनी आँखों देख लो,:Look at your own eyes,
यों क्या कहे कबीर?:what can Kabir say?
दस द्वारे का पिंजरा,:The body is like a cage with ten doors,
तामें पंछी का कौन,:and the soul within is like a bird,
रहे को अचरज है,:It’s astonishing that despite being in this cage,
गए अचम्भा कौन.:the soul remains unaware of its true nature.
ऐसी वाणी बोलिए,:Speak such words that,
मन का आपा खोय,:soothe the mind,
औरन को शीतल करे,:And cool others,
आपौ शीतल होय.:cools you too.
हीरा वहाँ न खोलिये,:Do not open the diamond,
जहाँ कुंजड़ों की हाट,:where there are thorns,
बांधो चुप की पोटरी,:Tie it in a silent pouch,
लागहु अपनी बाट.:and keep it close to your heart.
कुटिल वचन सबसे बुरा,:The most harmful words are deceitful,
जारि कर तन हार,:they wound the body,
साधु वचन जल रूप,:The words of a saint are like water,
बरसे अमृत धार.:raining down as nectar.
जग में बैरी कोई नहीं,:In this world there is no enemy,
जो मन शीतल होय,:for one whose mind remains cool,
यह आपा तो ड़ाल दे,:Let go of your ego,
दया करे सब कोय.:and show compassion to everyone.
मैं रोऊँ जब जगत को,:I weep for the world,
मोको रोवे न होय,:but I do not weep for myself,
मोको रोबे सोचना,:My tears flow for the thoughts,
जो शब्द बोय की होय.:and words that others express.
सोवा साधु जगाइए,:Wake up the sleeping saint,
करे नाम का जाप,:chant the name of the Divine,
यह तीनों सोते भले,:Even if all three are asleep,
साकित सिंह और साँप.:jackal lion and snake.
अवगुन कहूँ शराब का,:I criticize the faults of alcohol,
आपा अहमक साथ,:yet I am attached to my own ego,
मानुष से पशुआ करे दाय,:Humans show compassion to animals,
गाँठ से खात.:but they devour each other with greed.
बाजीगर का बांदरा,:The juggler’s monkey,
ऐसा जीव मन के साथ,:such a creature dances in accordance with the mind,
नाना नाच दिखाय कर,:Displaying various tricks,
राखे अपने साथ.:it keeps it close.
अटकी भाल शरीर में,:The arrow remains stuck in the body,
तीर रहा है टूट,:the arrow is ready to break,
चुंबक बिना निकले नहीं,:can't remove it without a magnet,
कोटि पठन को फूट.:still attracts countless iron filings.
कबिरा जपना काठ की,:Kabir says chanting beads is like counting wooden beads,
क्या दिखलावे मोय,:if the heart is not engaged in true remembrance,
हिरदय नाम न जपेगा,:If the heart does not chant the name,
यह जपनी क्या होय?:what use is this repetition?
पतिवृता मैली,:The adulterous woman is impure,
काली कुचल कुरूप,:her actions dark and ugly,
पतिवृता के रूप पर,:Yet when seen as the form of devotion,
वारो कोटि सरूप.:she becomes as radiant as millions.
बैध मुआ रोगी मुआ,:the afflicted one died the patient died,
मुआ सकल संसार,:the whole world died,
एक कबीरा ना मुआ,:Only one Kabira did not die,
जेहि के राम अधार.:for whom Lord Rama is the support.
हर चाले तो मानव,:If you stay within limits, you are a mere mortal,
बेहद चले सो साध,:But if you transcend boundaries, you become a saint,
हद बेहद दोनों तजे,:Abandon both limits and boundlessness,
ताको भता अगाध.:and find the unfathomable truth.
राम रहे बन भीतरे,:Ram remains within,
गुरु की पूजा ना आस,:yet there is no worship that equals teacher's quality,
रहे कबीर पाखण्ड सब,:All hypocrisy persists,
झूठे सदा निराश.:and the false remain forever disappointed.
तीरथ गये ते एक फल,:One who goes on pilgrimages receives only one fruit,
सन्त मिले फल चार,:while meeting a saint yields four fruits,
सत्गुरु मिले अनेक फल,:But meeting the true Guru results in countless fruits,
कहें कबीर विचार.:says Kabir.
सुमरण से मन लाइए,:Remembering God brings peace to mind,
जैसे पानी बिन मीन,:Just as a fish cannot survive without water,
प्राण तजे बिन बिछड़े,:the soul cannot exist without the remembrance of the Divine,
सन्त कबीर कह दीन.:Saint Kabir says this practice is essential for spiritual well-being.
समझाये समझे नहीं,:Explaining yet not understood,
पर के साथ बिकाय,:but sold or chooses to go with others,
मैं खींचत हूँ आपके,:I pull you close,
तू चला जमपुर जाए.:yet you wander off to distant lands.
हंसा मोती विण्न्या,:the swan picks up pearls compared to spiritual knowledge,
कुञ्च्न थार भराय,:filling its nest with them,
जो जन मार्ग न जाने,:but the one who doesn’t know the path to spiritual knowledge,
सो तिस कहा कराय?:what can they say?
कहना सो कह दिया,:what needed to be said has been said,
अब कुछ कहा न जाय,:now nothing remains to be spoken,
एक रहा दूजा गया,:one stayed the other departed,
दरिया लहर समाय.:and the river’s waves or time flowed.
वस्तु है ग्राहक नहीं,:the object exists but there is no buyer,
वस्तु सागर अनमोल,:the object is an invaluable ocean,
बिना करम का मानव,:the human without a purpose in life,
फिरैं डांवाडोल.:wanders aimlessly.
कली खोटा जग आंधरा,:the world is blind,
शब्द न माने कोय,:yet it does not believe the words of truth,
चाहे कहँ सत आइना,:it prefers a distorted reflection over reality,
जो जग बैरी होय.:even if it becomes an enemy.
कामी क्रोधी लालची इनसे भक्ति न होय,:the lustful angry and greedy cannot attain true devotion,
भक्ति करे कोइ सूरमा,:only a brave soul can truly practice devotion,
जाति वरन कुल खोय.:who transcends caste lineage and ego.
जागन में सोवन करे,:while awake one sleeps,
साधन में लौ लाय,:in spiritual practice one brings the flame,
सूरत डोर लागी रहे,:the thread of awareness remains intact,
तार टूट नाहिं जाय.:never break even amidst life’s challenges.
साधु ऐसा चहिए जैसा सूप सुभाय,:a saint should be like a winnowing basket,
सार-सार को गहि रहे,:separating the valuable grain,
थोथ देइ उड़ाय.:and discarding the useless chaff.
लगी लग्न छूटे नाहिं,:the attachment does not wane,
जीभ चोंच जरि जाय,:just as a tongue keeps licking a wound,
मीठा कहा अंगार में,:perceives the fire symbolizing desires as sweet,
जाहि चकोर चबाय.:similar to how the chakor bird consumes fire.
भक्ति गेंद चौगान की,:devotion is like a marigold flower,
भावे कोई ले जाय,:anyone can take it,
कह कबीर कुछ भेद नाहिं,:Kabir says there is no discrimination,
कहां रंक कहां राय?:who is a king and who is a beggar?
घट का परदा खोलकर,:open the curtain of your heart,
सन्मुख दे दीदार,:and behold the divine,
बाल सनेही सांइयाँ,:like a child yearning for its beloved,
आवा अन्त का यार.:seek the eternal truth.
अन्तर्यामी एक तुम,:you are the indwelling spirit,
आत्मा के आधार,:the foundation of the soul,
जो तुम छोड़ो हाथ तो,:if you let go of your grasp,
कौन उतारे पार?:who will carry me across?
मैं अपराधी जन्म का,:I am a sinner by birth,
नख-सिख भरा विकार,:filled with flaws and imperfections,
तुम दाता दु:ख भंजना,:you the compassionate one dispel my sorrows,
मेरी करो सम्हार.:and grant me liberation.
प्रेम न बड़ी ऊपजै,:love does not grow by accumulation,
प्रेम न हाट बिकाय,:nor is it sold in the market,
राजा प्रजा जोहि रुचें,:the one whom kings and commoners admire,
शीश देई ले जाय.:willingly offers their head to them.
प्रेम प्याला जो पिये,:the one who drinks from the cup of love,
शीश दक्षिणा देय,:willingly offers their head as a gift,
लोभी शीश न दे सके,:greedy souls cannot part with their heads,
नाम प्रेम का लेय.:but utters the name love.
सुमिरन में मन लाइए जैसे नाद कुरंग,:in meditation immerse your mind like the sound of a deer’s call,
कहैं कबीर बिसरे नहीं प्रान तजे तेहि संग.:Kabir says do not forget even for a moment and leave your ego behind and merge with the divine.
सुमरित सुरत जगाय कर मुख के कछु न बोल,:in meditation awaken your inner awareness by keeping your mouth silent,
बाहर का पट बन्द कर,:close the door to external distractions,
अन्दर का पट खोल.:and open the door to inner revelation.
छीर रूप सतनाम है,:the form of love is like a torn cloth,
नीर रूप व्यवहार,:while its essence is like pure water,
हंस रूप कोई साधु है,:a true sage embodies the form of a swan,
सत का छाननहार.:discerning the truth within.
ज्यों तिल मांही तेल है,:just as oil resides within the sesame seed,
ज्यों चकमक में आग,:and fire lies dormant within the flint,
तेरा सांई तुझमें,:hence the divine exists within you,
बस जाग सके तो जाग.:If you can then truly wake up.
जा करण जग ढ़ूँढ़िया सो तो घट ही मांहि,:when you search the world you find the divine within your own heart,
परदा दिया भरम का,:given the veil of illusion,
ताते सूझे नाहिं.:blinds you from recognizing it.
जबही नाम हिरदे घरा,:when the name of the divine resides within the heart,
भया पाप का नाश,:fear and sins are destroyed,
मानो चिंगरी आग की परी पुरानी घास.:it’s as if the old grass is consumed by the fire of realization.
नहीं शीतल है चन्द्रमा,:the moon is not as cool as the heart of a saintly person,
हिंम नहीं शीतल होय,:and frost is not as cool as their demeanor,
कबीरा शीतल सन्त जन,:Kabir says the true saints are always cool and calm,
नाम सनेही सोय.:and immersed in the love of the divine name.
आहार करे मन भावता,:when one eats with mindfulness,
इंदी किए स्वाद,:savoring each morsel,
नाक तलक पूरन भरे,:and the senses are fully satisfied by the nose,
तो का कहिए प्रसाद.:that is true nourishment.
जब लग नाता जगत का,:when worldly attachments persist,
तब लग भक्ति न होय,:true devotion remains elusive,
नाता तोड़े हरि भजे,:only when one breaks free from these attachments and wholeheartedly worships the divine,
भगत कहावें सोय.: can they be called a true devotee.
जल ज्यों प्यारा माहरी,:just as the fish loves water,
लोभी प्यारा दाम,:the greedy person loves wealth,
माता प्यारा बारका,:the mother loves her child,
भगति प्यारा नाम.:and the devotee’s love for the divine name.
दिल का मरहम ना मिला,:the balm for the heart was not found,
जो मिला सो गर्जी,:what was found roared like thunder or surprise,
कह कबीर आसमान फटा,:kabir says the sky split open just like life unfolds in unexpected ways,
क्योंकर सीवे दर्जी.:for the tailor stitched it.
बानी से पह्चानिये,:recognize a person by their words,
साम चोर की घात,:they reveal whether they are a thief or not,
अन्दर की करनी से सब,:what lies within a person’s heart,
निकले मुँह कई बात.:eventually finds its way out through their speech.
जब लगि भगति सकाम है,:when devotion is driven by desires,
तब लग निष्फल सेव,:selfless service remains unfulfilled.
कह कबीर वह क्यों मिले निष्कामी तज देव.:Kabir questions why one would seek the divine with selfish motives.
फूटी आँख विवेक की,:the broken eye of discernment,
लखे ना सन्त असन्त,:cannot recognize saints from non-saints,
जाके संग दस-बीस हैं,:those who associate with the ten-twenty wise,
ताको नाम महन्त.:become great through the power of the divine name.
दाया भाव ह्र्दय नहीं,:the heart devoid of compassion is not a heart,
ज्ञान थके बेहद,:knowledge exhausted to the limit,
ते नर नरक ही जायेंगे,:such individuals will find themselves in hell,
सुनि-सुनि साखी शब्द.:their words echoing in vain.
दाया कौन पर कीजिये,:who should we show compassion to,
का पर निर्दय होय?:and to whom should we be truly heartless?
सांई के सब जीव है,:all beings belong to the same supreme being,
कीरी कुंजर दोय.:the ant and the elephant are equally dear to him.
जब मैं था तब गुरु नहीं,:when I existed there was no teacher,
अब गुरु हैं मैं नाय,:now that the teacher exists I am not there,
प्रेम गली अति साँकरी,:the lane of love is extremely narrow,
ता मे दो न समाय.:two cannot walk through it together.
छिन ही चढ़े छिन ही उतरे,:when love fluctuates moment by moment,
सो तो प्रेम न होय,:it is not true love,
अघट प्रेम पिंजरे बसे,:true love resides in an unbreakable cage,
प्रेम कहावे सोय.:and that love is called divine.
जहाँ काम तहाँ नाम नहिं,:where there is desire there is no remembrance of the divine name,
जहाँ नाम नहिं वहाँ काम,:where there is remembrance of the divine name desire ceases,
दोनों कबहूँ नहिं मिले,:the two never meet,
रवि रजनी इक धाम.:they are like day and night forever separate.
कबीरा धीरज के धरे,:when patience is held,
हाथी मन भर खाय,:even an elephant consumes food to its fill,
टूट एक के कारने,:but when it breaks loose due to a single cause,
स्वान घरै घर जाय.:it can wreak havoc entering every home.
ऊँचे पानी न टिके,:when high water does not stay,
नीचे ही ठहराय,:it always settles at the bottom,
नीचा हो सो भरिए पिए,:the one who remains low and humble can drink and quench their thirst,
ऊँचा प्यासा जाय.:while the one standing high and proud remains thirsty.
सबते लघुताई भली,:the one who remains humble is truly great,
लघुता ते सब होय,:everyone becomes small in their presence,
जौसे दूज का चन्द्रमा,:just as the moon of the second day appears new,
शीश नवे सब कोय.:so does everyone appear insignificant before them.
संत ही में सत बांटई,:the one who shares truth is truly a saint,
रोटी में ते टूक,:they distribute morsels even in a piece of bread,
कहे कबीर ता दास को कबहूँ न आवे चूक.:kabir says, such a person never makes a mistake in their actions.
मार्ग चलते जो गिरा,:when one stumbles on the path,
ताकों नाहि दोष,:it's not his fault,
यह कबिरा बैठा रहे,:but if kabir or anybody remains seated with no action,
तो सिर करड़े दोष.:then the fault lies with him.
जब ही नाम ह्रदय धरयो,:when the divine name is held within the heart,
भयो पाप का नाश,:sins are destroyed,
मानो चिनगी अग्नि की परि पुरानी घास.:it’s as if the old grass is consumed by the fire of realization.
काया काठी काल घुन,:the body is like a thorn,
जतन-जतन सो खाय,:and time constantly wears it down,
काया वैध ईश बस,:within this body resides the divine,
मर्म न काहू पाय.:but its essence remains elusive and out of our reach.
सुख सागर का शील है,:the ocean of happiness is elusive,
कोई न पावे थाह,:no one can find its shore,
शब्द बिना साधु नही,:without the divine word there is no true saint,
द्रव्य बिना नहीं शाह.:and without inner wealth or spiritual realization there is no true king.
बाहर क्या दिखलाए,:what you display outwardly matters little,
अनन्तर जपिए राम,:meditate on the divine within,
कहा काज संसार से,:worldly tasks are temporary,
तुझे धनी से काम.:but your true work lies in connecting with the divine.
तेरा साँई तुझमें,:your god resides within you,
ज्यों पहुपन में बास,:just as the fragrance resides within the flower,
बास:fragnance
कस्तूरी का हिरन ज्यों फिर-फिर ढ़ूँढ़त घास.:and the elusive musk scent that the musk deer seeks but cannot find.
कथा-कीर्तन कुल विशे भवसागर की नाव,:the recitation and singing of spiritual stories and hymns is the boat to cross the ocean of existence,
कहत कबीरा या जगत में नाहि और उपाव.:Kabir says there is no other way to transcend this worldly ocean.
कबिरा यह तन जात है,:kabir says this body is like a boat,
जात:boat
सके तो ठौर लगा,:anchor it to find stability,
कै सेवा कर साधु की,:by serving the saints,
कै गोविंद गुन गा.:and by singing the praises of the divine.
कहता तो बहुत मिला,:many have spoken or share knowledge,
गहता मिला न कोय,:but genuine understanding is rare,
सो कहता वह जान दे जो नहिं गहता होय.:the one who doesn’t merely speak but truly comprehends can provide insight.